[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So I'm an academic
internal medicine doc.
So I'm a professor of medicine
at the University of Iowa.
And I absolutely believe
in science, in drugs,
and technology.
When I was diagnosed with
relapsing-remitting multiple
sclerosis in 2000, I sought
out the best MS center
in the Cleveland Clinic,
saw their best people,
took the newest drugs,
and treated my disease
very aggressively.
Still within three
years, I had converted
from relapsing-remitting
to progressive.
And it was very
apparent that I was
headed towards becoming
bedridden and quite possibly
demented by my illness.
And I redesigned my diet.
The magic begins.
Within three months,
my fatigue is gone.
My brain fog is gone.
I can stop Modafinil
or Provigil.
In six months, I'm walking
around without my walking
sticks or canes.
I no longer need my
tilt recline wheelchair.
In nine months, I bike around
the block for the first time.
In 12 months, I do a 18-mile
bike ride with my family.
This really changes how I
understand disease and health.
And I'm discovering that
people are responding
really very, very well.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Chronic disease and
autoimmune disease has reached
epidemic proportions.
By some estimates, autoimmune
disease affects about one
in five.
When you add in other chronic
illnesses, about 75% of us
are unhealthy.
And that's not the way
it's supposed to be.
>> We're clearly in a
epidemic because the quality
of our diets is
steadily declining.
>> These are day-to-day,
hour-to-hour diseases that
create a serious burden on
individuals and families.
So I think we're all having a
different level of motivation
at this point to do
something different.
The media chooses to look
at these feared outbreaks
on other continents
when really we
should be screaming
from the rooftop
that, hey, chronic
diseases are on the rise.
And yet, we have the
ability to change that.
>> If you look at CDC data,
you will find that the health
of Americans has been worsening
over the last 20 years.
And I think because the
primary driver is diet,
but it's also the way in which
we need to find a way out.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The inspiration is the theme
of this series TEDxMtHood is
the road less traveled, which is
what we're talking about is how
do we go to new places that
we've never seen before.
So I'm Sabina and
I live in Portland.
And this is my studio.
I'm an artist.
I make installations
and paintings.
I also teach at Portland
State in the art department.
I turned 40 this year in August.
And I got what they call
ulcerative colitis--
the lower left side
of my colon, 50 feet.
So it was pretty
mild, but mild is
like a relative term when
you've sort of lived your life
carefree.
And all of a sudden, you're
running to the bathroom
and having bleeding
and stuff like that.
So a lot of my work
is about taking things
that have symbols of conflict
and transforming them,
the idea of transformative
power of beauty
and how do we connect past that.
It really gets to
you after a while.
And I think that a lot
of people don't realize.
I didn't realize what I
was doing to my own body.
>> Ooh.
Now I'm --
Now I'm going to do
your favorite strength.
>> My favorite strength.
What's my favorite strength?
- Try to make it knock down.
>> I'm Adam and I live
in Tigard, Oregon.
And I'm 31 years old.
And I live here with my wife.
And I have two boys.
And I work as a site
manager for Intel.
With our fridge here.
So these things here, my
older sister lives with us.
And she drinks these
kinds of things.
We don't normally drink
these kind of things, but--
>> I drink tha--
>> Yeah, we'll have like juice,
probably a much higher intake
of juice than we
should be having.
Our vegetable drawer is usually
pretty light in its contents.
Hopefully, that will change.
I've always been
reasonably healthy.
I've gone back and forth
between like a higher
weight and a lower weight.
My cholesterol is kind of
low on the good cholesterol
and high on the bad cholesterol.
Blood pressure is in
control with medication.
And most recently, when I
had my last weight gain,
I developed gastro
reflux, acid reflux,
and PVACs, premature ventricular
contractions with my heart,
which are kind of hereditary.
But they've been
very much exacerbated
since I had a weight gain.
>> In 5 days, you could
have a new stomach lining.
It's always trying
to rebuild itself.
My name is Amanda
and I'm a nanny.
I live in Bend, Oregon.
I consider myself a pretty
healthy eater just already.
I've always been a
pretty healthy eater.
It's why it's so frustrating
that this happened to me.
I was diagnosed with rheumatoid
arthritis about four years ago.
So most of my pain is in
my wrists and my ankle.
And wrists-- I'm very
limited in activities,
simple activities like yoga.
I was a huge yoga
person, and now I
can't put any
weight on my wrists.
Being a nanny, I have to be
really picky about my families
about the ages because
I am unable to--
it's hard for me to pick
up kids because my wrists.
They don't bend really
very far anymore.
And it's funny.
Wouldn't think you'd need
your wrists to hold a child,
but you really do.
So it's kind of
affecting my work.
Recently, about 2
and 1/2 months ago,
I started Actemra,
which is also biologic.
And that's an injection I
give myself once a week.
It's pretty scary-looking.
It's working-ish.
The inflammation levels
are back down to normal.
Everything looks good
on paper according
to the rheumatologists.
But I'm feeling a little bit
better but definitely not 100%.
I still have a lot of pain.
After hearing a lot
of success stories,
I am going to give it a try.
And I'm going to really
put my all into it
because it's kind of like
my last ditch effort.
>> That one's called Crater,
but then there is all this plant
life.
So when I first got diagnosed,
I basically ignored my body
for the first two months.
And I was like I'm--
this is not happening...
I was having bleeding.
And then finally, I
got really frustrated.
And I was like
looking for answers.
And then I found this diet.
>> Even besides the medications,
like I want to be a good role
model for my boys.
>> Why carrots?
>> For me, I'm starting to
realize more and more that
it's an investment that you have
to make or else you end up with
this.
>> I think if I were able to
be well again, I would be--
I would never take
anything for granted again
because that's just--
that's all I want.
It's all I want out of
anything in the world is
I want to feel better.
I want this to go away.
I want to be the old me, back
when I didn't take everything
for granted.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The conventional approach
for a chronic disease is
to diagnose and then immediately
treat with the medication.
And so we also
compartmentalize diseases.
So you treat by organ systems.
So as people accumulate more
and more chronic diseases,
they have more and
more physicians
on more and more
different drugs.
>> It turns out that among
people in the medical world,
there's not a long tradition
of appreciating nutrition.
Most medical schools
have not included it
to any great degree
in their curriculum.
>> In terms of the
conventional medical model,
conventional physicians
aren't trained in nutrition.
They have so much other
education that they focus on.
Most medical doctors
receive four hours or less
in nutrition.
>> The traditional nutrition
information that has been
included in medical school
curriculum has been very
biochemically-based.
Historically, students
do learn about how
does vitamin A or vitamin D
interact within a human system.
>> What we have to do is to
help physicians understand
the concept of
nutritional therapy,
which means that good nutrients
can reverse many kinds
of chronic diseases in a
way that's very positive
for the patient without the
use of drugs and other things.
And I don't object
to the use of drugs,
but there are ways
in which physicians
can help their patients by
helping the patient know
how important nutrition
is in their own management
of their conditions.
>> What medical students aren't
being taught is if you fix
the root cause, which
is diet and lifestyle,
you could roll back these
progressive diseases.
>> My name is V
Capaldi, and I am--
I consider myself a miracle.
I have secondary progressive MS
and have been legally disabled,
August 5th, it was 15 years.
And that translated
into bilateral loss
of the use of my
hands and inability
to swallow and to basically
take care of myself, which
resulted in full-time care.
I'm going to try
and guide my hand
to apply a little eyeliner.
And then I started
doing the protocol.
And within 30 days, my
body started responding.
Miracles started happening.
And it continues to
happen even to this day.
And I actually am pretty
close to gainful employment.
I wasn't able to
drive for many years.
I actually bought a new car.
Got a little red Fiat.
[APPLAUSE]
I'm thriving even better than I
was before I was ever diagnosed
with multiple sclerosis.
>> In this journey that
you have to find meaning
in your circumstances right
now so that there is purpose
and value in their
circumstances.
And with good fortune,
diet and lifestyle changes
will stop the decline and quite
potentially restore function,
reduce symptoms,
allow them to reduce
and even eliminate some, if
not all, of their medicines.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It's going to be really
difficult giving up all
the foods that you're used
to eating and especially like
foods have high fat or high
salt, those kind of foods.
I feel like my palate is geared
toward the typical American
diet.
>> I think everyone has a
moment where they have to have
the aha.
And they have to commit.
And I don't think
that that had ever
happened until I was like, huh.
I'm eating this chocolate.
And probably in
the next hour, I'm
going to be in the bathroom
with severe symptoms.
And that kind of
behavior mechanism
like it's an electric shock.
It really gets to
you after a while.
>> The hardest thing will
definitely be, I think,
the social aspect because
my friends are very social.
They're, every day, they're
out doing something.
And usually, after some sort
of outdoor activity like a bike
ride or a hike or a
long walk with the dog,
they'll meet up at Brother
John's or 10 Barrel
or and have a couple
of beers and eat pizza.
So that's going to be probably
the hardest thing for me.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> All right.
Are we ready?
>> Yeah, we talked earlier
about some chicken livers.
>> Yes.
>> What did you do with the
chicken livers down here?
>> Cool.
>> There you go.
Anything else for you?
>> Do you know a little
information about where
the livers are
from or where the--
>> Yeah, they're from--
>> I have heard that it's a
huge component of the diet,
emphasis on meat and vegetables,
but also the organ meats
because there are some things in
organ meats that you can't get
anywhere else.
>> Organic feed.
They're on a non-GMO
Project, things like that.
>> Cool.
>> So that's where--
we actually switched to
them because of that so.
>> OK.
Let's hope it's good
because liver sounds
a little hard to stomach.
Interesting.
>> Most people know they want
to or they should eat better,
eat healthier.
And if they had
access to whole foods,
there really is
a genuine concern
that the food won't taste good.
And if the food
doesn't taste good,
people are likely not to eat it.
And so this goes back to having
a little bit of inspiration,
motivation, and risk in
the kitchen to cook again.
>> It's hard to make dietary
changes when you've been eating
a poor diet for your whole
life, and nobody's told you hey,
this is actually putting you
at increased risk of disease.
And so, we're not really
there to tell people
they're doing something wrong
or that it's even their fault.
We are just providing
the information
and giving them some
guiding principles
so that when they do
start to make the changes,
it can come from within.
So we really want to highlight
this pathway to veggies
and including healthy
fats with your meal.
>> My colleague Dr. Julie
Briley and I developed the Food
as Medicine Everyday series
almost five years ago.
So it's a 12-week, hands-on,
whole foods cooking
and nutrition series
that is actually taught
by naturopathic physicians.
And every week, we build
on our nutrition knowledge.
Women should have no
more than six teaspoons
of added sugar a day.
And men should have no
more than 9 teaspoons.
So we need time to integrate
that information in order
to lead to long-term habits,
and then the incorporation
of cooking meals together
is really important.
And getting people
to touch food,
see food, smell
food really helps
to develop a healthy
relationship with food.
We have a wide range of
socioeconomic and educational
backgrounds in terms
of the participants who
come into these Food
as Medicine Every Day.
And in terms of label reading
and nutrition knowledge,
it's an equal playing field.
>> We've been teaching this
program in very diverse
communities in Portland
for the last five years.
And most recently, we've been
in Coffee Creek Correctional
Facility.
And so this is a women's
correctional facility
located south of Portland.
In addition, a
lot of these women
are dealing with worsening
diabetes, weight gain,
and other health issues
while incarcerated.
And in reality, these are
women that are going home.
They're going home
to their families.
And they want to
be rehabilitated.
They want to cook well for their
family and their other family
members that might
have diseases.
So they truly really
need this information.
>> So when you
look on your label,
you'll see a section called
Nutrition facts with all
the numbers listed.
I'm going to tell you
why we don't actually
want to look at that
part of the label.
The most important
part to look at first
is actually the ingredient list.
>> And it's such an important,
crucial skill that people need
to learn.
And then we go through.
And we actually read
some of these labels
and we see that one
soda is double or triple
the amount of sugar that
you should have in one day.
This is like
mind-blowing for people.
Then we look at yogurt labels
and processed food labels.
I mean, it's truly such
an eye-opening experience.
>> These are vanilla.
So this is 18 grams of
sugar, 15 grams of sugar,
17 grams of sugar.
This one has some
maltodextrin in it.
This one is actually pretty good
on sugar content for ketchup--
only two grams of
sugar in a tablespoon.
Good.
Sweet, not very healthy.
My blood pressure
is pretty high.
I think the last time that
I took it it was 125 over 85
or something like that.
It's elevated.
So I take a beta
blocker for that.
It's called Metoprolol.
And so my goal with this project
is to get off that medication.
And a couple of the tools
are 100% pomegranate juice
and hibiscus tea, which both
work to naturally lower blood
pressure in place
of a beta blocker.
What are the ingredients?
Is it 100% pomegranate
juice, do you know?
Just juice from
ripe pomegranates.
>> Perfect.
That's exactly what
I'm looking for.
Absolutely.
>> Awesome.
>> Just nothing with no added
sugar or cherry juice in it.
>> That one is, definitely.
>> Perfect.
Glad we got it.
>> Cool.
Thank you so much.
>> Yeah.
>> What physicians-- we get
very uncomfortable when a simple
solution fixes many
disease states.
But it turns out that
the simple solution
of a nutrient-dense diet
filled with vegetables,
getting rid of the
toxic stuff, is
the simplest solution for nearly
every chronic disease state.
It may not cure you.
But it'll certainly
reduce symptoms,
reduce the need for
meds, often to the point
where you, if you
stay with it, you
can get off medication after
medication after medication.
>> So when I was at my sickest,
I was pretty much bedridden.
I had lost my job.
I had been in the hospital
three times in six weeks.
I was diagnosed with
Hashimoto's disease, which
is an autoimmune thyroid disease
and celiac disease about 3
and 1/2 years ago after about
a year of declining health.
And when I got my
diagnosis, they just
told me to go gluten-free and
that everything would change,
and I would feel totally better.
And I didn't.
I actually felt a lot worse.
And I started to think,
well, maybe there's
something about my diet that's
really not supporting me.
And I did a lot of research.
And I really came across
dietary modification
for people with
autoimmune disease.
And what I found was
totally shocking.
So I had been living
off of all of the foods
that the experts were now
recommending that people
with autoimmune don't eat.
And so those were things
like grains, legumes, soy.
And that was like
all I was eating.
So I decided to do
an elimination diet.
And I removed all
of the gut triggers.
So I did the
autoimmune protocol.
And it totally
transformed my life.
And six months, I was
back to good health.
And I wouldn't say
everything was perfect,
but it was the thing that really
jumpstarted me on the road
to recovery.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What we have come to accept
as normal is the steady decline
from the age of 18 with
worsening blood pressure,
worsening clogging
of the artery,
worsening mental capacities.
When we quit eating all these
vegetables and start eating
sugar and white flour, we
decrease the fiber content.
And we used to have 100 to 150
grams of fiber in our diet.
And now we have
maybe 15 to 20 grams.
So we're starving the
health-promoting bacteria.
So we've done a lot of
things that switched us
from having a healthy,
disease-resistant body
for which our DNA programmed
us to an inflamed, sickly,
disease-prone body by having
micronutrient deficiencies,
by having our gene
expression changed,
and by shifting which bacteria
and viruses live in and on us.
>> The microbiome is all of
the microorganisms that live
on and within our bodies.
And so there's about 10
times as many microorganisms
that live in our bodies as there
are cells of our own bodies.
And one of the things
that we understand
is that we have this symbiotic
relationship with them.
We provide a lovely home for
all these microorganisms.
And then they directly
influence our health.
One of the things that is
the most important property
of a healthy gut
microbiome is diversity.
So we want something like 500
to 1,000 different species
of microorganisms
growing in there
in healthy relative quantities.
There's certain things
that can actually
make the wrong types
of bacteria grow.
Then you have a system
that's out of balance.
Then you have the
lack of variety
that is one of the biggest
risks for chronic illness.
So we need to feed them
vegetables and fruit and nuts
and seeds and
these great sources
of nutrient-dense fiber,
lots of plant phytochemicals.
And then we can have this
healthy, robust variety
of microorganisms living
within our digestive tracts
living within our bodies
that are then providing us
with all of these great
benefits like regulating
the immune system.
So the gut microbiome beyond
influencing the immune system
influences things
like brain health,
influences how our
neurotransmitters are
regulating themselves.
They can change our hormones
and influence our hormones.
And we understand just the
tip of the iceberg when
it comes to the gut microbiome.
We are starting
to understand how
profound and far-reaching
their effects are.
>> Do you want to stir?
Can you stir it for me?
Sophia's into cooking herself.
She's really good at
telling me what I'm
supposed to eat and not eat.
Right, Sophia?
>> Mm-hmm.
>> You're like, Mommy, are you
sure you're supposed to eat
that?
I'm like, yeah, you're right.
It's actually pretty simple.
People think that yogurt
is really complicated,
but it only takes 15 minutes.
It's not like you're
chopping 3,000 vegetables.
It's a lot easier--
>> Well, you don't put
vegetables in here.
>> I know.
It's a lot easier than
making, like, vegetable soup.
Sophia, look at this.
This is what makes the yogurt.
It's called a culture.
>> Just like those,
my science kits.
>> Yeah, your science kits.
Like when I started with
this healthy way of eating,
my inflammation was like
60, which is really high.
And now it's gone
down to normal levels.
Like at the end of the day,
I would come home from work.
And my lower back would be
paining and I'd have bleeding.
And now I can have a really
energetic day, like I
can go to the zoo with my kids.
I can go out in the evening.
So I can resume a normal
life, which last year was not
possible.
So that has been
a major victory.
And then we're just
going to put this on top.
And it will be
ready in 24 hours.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So when you start
doing a dietary approach
and a lifestyle approach, you're
providing the resources that
your body needs to heal and
the opportunity to heal,
which you get through sleep,
and you get through the hormone
regulation that comes with
stress management and activity.
So you get resources
and opportunity.
And then you don't have to place
a Band-Aid on the situation,
right?
The body has the
most amazing capacity
to heal itself when
you actually give it
the resources and
the opportunity.
And so when we give our bodies
that chance to be healthy,
our bodies take it.
We don't need to just drug
ourselves up to not feel bad.
We can actually feel amazing.
So I used to be morbidly obese.
I had over a dozen different
diagnosed health conditions,
including three
autoimmune diseases.
And I was sick.
I was in pain all the time.
I had migraines.
I had depression, anxiety.
I didn't have any energy.
And I had two young daughters.
And I was right at the cusp
of this really high-profile
academic career without the
energy to be a career mom
and without the energy
to try to balance what's
necessary to run a
successful academic lab
in the current
funding environment
and be the best mom that I
wanted to be for my children.
And so I had to take
time off of my career
in order to just do
one thing at a time.
And I was not
surviving motherhood.
I was getting sicker and sicker.
I was not getting enough sleep.
I was a wreck, and
I needed a solution.
So I started to apply
my scientific background
to my own health and
experienced absolutely
what some people would call
miraculous health turnaround.
So within two weeks
of changing my diet,
I was able to discontinue
six prescription medications.
And it gave me back
something that I didn't even
understand I could have again.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm feeling better.
I'm sleeping really
well at night.
I sleep-- I used to wake up
like four or five times a night
and just toss and turn and be
uncomfortable for the position
I was in with my joints.
And now I sleep--
I'll sleep the whole
way until the morning
and maybe only wake up one time.
It's really, really awesome.
That's the biggest
change that I've noticed.
So but yeah, energy levels
are higher definitely.
It's definitely energy and sleep
and I think overall mood too.
I feel really
empowered and really
excited to get up every
day and try new things
and cook new things.
Here goes.
It's definitely not something
that happens overnight
as I'm sure you guys know.
>> The American Heart
Association has shown that
in 2014, we spend about
$1 billion every day
on cardiac-related
disease health care costs.
And they're expecting that
to double in another 14 or 15
years so that at around '25,
'26, then there's going to be--
the cost will be twice as much.
And we'll be spending
$2 billion a day.
Taking care of someone
who has chronic heart
failure, for example, or
coronary artery disease
can be very expensive in terms
of surgeries or procedures.
And therefore, my view
is that we will not
be able to sustain caring
for everyone who has it.
That's the compromise
we'll have to make.
And we'll have to give people
the best medical treatment we
can without undergoing
all the procedures that
might be lifesaving because
I don't think we could afford
to do it if that many people in
our population had the problem.
>> So when you look at the
statistics for something like
autoimmune disease, you've
got roughly 50 to 60 million
Americans who are affected,
which is twice the number
of Americans that are affected
by cardiovascular disease
and four times the number of
Americans that are affected
by cancer.
>> The CDC projects that one in
three people will have type 2
diabetes by the year 2050 if
we stay on this trajectory that
we're on right now.
And that means we can't
stay on that trajectory.
Because if that
were to happen, it
would bankrupt our
medical system.
>> And the decreased worker
productivity is two to three
times the cost of
the medical care.
Another sidebar is that
the lack of healthy workers
will devastate our economy.
Even if you decide
we're not going
to cover any of those health
care costs, that people--
you're on your own
for that, we can't
afford the drain on the economy
from lack of healthy workers.
>> What The Moore Institute
wants to do is to help people
understand the process by
which poor diets actually lead
to disease.
And that brings up
the word epigenetic.
So epigenetics is
the modification
of genes by what we
call the environment.
And in this case, I'm
referring to nutrition.
The science that I was talking
about that we want to share
is based on discoveries
that have only been known
for the last decade or two.
And that is that the nutrition
that a person gets when they're
developing is what determines
their likelihood of having
diseases when they're older.
So now let me explain the 100
year effect, how it works.
I'm in my 60's.
My mother is in her 90's.
And the egg that
made me was made
in my 92-year-old
now mother when
she was a fetus in my
grandmother's womb.
And the egg that made me was
almost exactly 100 years ago.
So I'm 100, and that
100-year life I've had
has been dependent on my
grandmother's nutrition,
on my mother's nutrition,
on my childhood nutrition,
and now on my
nutrition as an adult.
If I can just give
you an example,
the way you get nutrients while
you're developing before you're
born will tell a growing
body how to turn on genes
or turn off genes.
And if there is not enough
nutrients to grow well,
then what will happen is
some of the genes that
should be turned
on and operating
will be turned down like a
dimmer switch on a light.
They'll be gradually turned
down by a mechanism called
epigenetics.
And then later in
life, those genes
will make a person more
vulnerable for having disease.
Now, many people
have said the problem
with emphasizing this is that it
somehow blames mothers for all
the disease that we have.
And that's really not true.
The truth is that the food
environment we all live
is where we ought to--
is the problem.
And if we have to
blame something,
we should blame the fact that
the American population has
allowed food industries to
determine our taste preferences
and somehow keep us from
eating the kinds of food that
would be healthy.
>> Last time I was
making goat yogurt.
And I was really enjoying that.
And I was still having
problems with some digestion.
So right now, I'm not doing
any dairy, yogurt included.
And I've also sort of started
pureeing my vegetables.
And it seems like
it's going better
with a more pureed
dairy-free diet.
I don't know.
I may have to go this
route for a while
until my body's like
totally more healed.
Like a typical
artist mentalities,
I start sort of getting--
I start speeding up and
then become more manic.
And every couple of days,
I'd have to go in for a yoga,
or I have to go in for
acupuncture or something to--
somebody to jolt me back
to my baseline, which
in turn helps me make
better choices with my food.
Just trying out things like
that to manage my energy level.
I love the big picture.
The details are excruciating.
Right now I'm in
the midst of that,
and then I have to switch hats
and think about my big idea
worth spreading.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> But I think this is the
beginning of a new movement
in the prepared foods industry
and the restaurant industry,
one that really
says we need trust,
and we need the maximum
amount of transparency.
People need to feel safe.
I do think it comes from
people being increasingly ill
and realizing for the first time
that their relationship to food
might participate
in their health.
But also I think because
of the health care
system and the rewards that are
going into preventative care,
people are taking more
initiative for their health.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We're at Dick's Kitchen,
named after me and functioning
originally as my kitchen as
I lived upstairs for a while
and was able to experiment
on this kind of a new idea.
I've got a couple of genetic
dice rolling against me having
both a methylation
defect and a tendency
toward either
pre-diabetes or diabetes
or something like that.
So I don't manage
blood sugar very well.
And therefore, what
I eat is crucial.
My health concerns
are not unique to me.
I've got probably a double
or triple whammy going,
but many folks have issues
that will be made better
by much more conscious eating.
Dick's Kitchen is
really an effort
to promote not just
healthier eating,
but a healthier approach
to how we source our food.
The rest of our menu is
intended to create food
that people recognize as their
favorite food, hamburgers
and side dishes and potatoes,
but done with much more thought
and much more balance in mind.
>> I feel like I interact
with people every day that are
suffering needlessly because
of choices they're making
because of convenience.
They don't know how
to help themselves.
Things aren't available for
them to help themselves.
And they feel trapped by what
products are available to them
in the grocery store.
Food is something that
can affect us immediately.
And so what's really
amazing is to give people
that experience of just
having a cup of broth
and noticing that
they don't have
a sour stomach in the morning.
And it's just interesting
to see parents
saying they've never seen
their children so calm,
or they've never felt
like they slept so well
after a meal and not
a deep, vacant sleep,
but a restorative, healthy
sleep, the kind you
should be having.
It's amazing how quickly
the body responds
when it has the tools it needs.
And I think the tools that
are the most accessible
for the body come in food form.
>> Yeah, so the
Brooklyn house is,
we call it European-style
comfort food.
So this lady would like
the pork chop special,
but she's on the SIBO protocol.
>> OK, so we have
the parsley puree.
>> Yes.
>> That we can do with her for--
>> And there's no
garlic chunks in there.
>> There's no garlic chunks.
It's all strained.
So we're all good to go.
>> Thank you.
And I often accidentally say
that our patients need this
or that when really
I mean our customers.
And it's because there are a
lot of naturopathic doctors
and nutritional therapists
in this city who trust us.
They've been here.
They've talked to us.
They know why we're
doing what we're doing.
They know how.
They have that transparency.
And so they trust giving us as
a resource to their patients.
So what we provide here
is a truly holistic food
as medicine experience.
You get both the foods
that are healthy for you
and the treatment that
is healthy for you.
You get to invite
your whole family.
And the family member who
likes the steak and potatoes,
and the family member's
vegan, and the family member
who has celiac disease
are all going to be fine.
And you with your
SIBO-specific diet
can feel like you
just ordered a meal.
And so those patient--
those customers are the most
invested in this restaurant.
They are personally invested in
the health of this restaurant
because it allows them a place
to go where they don't feel
like a social outcast
for trying to heal
their body through food.
>> The hardest thing to do
when you're introducing this
lifestyle to people is to
get them out of their heads.
People are actually, I think,
very instinctive eaters.
And when their body
responds positively
to a food regardless of whether
their brain is telling them
it's going to be kind of weird
or unusual, they will naturally
gravitate toward it as
a delicious experience.
Again, that doesn't
necessarily mean
they're ready to jump into
eating a whole piece of liver.
But if we can prepare
it in a way that
makes it more
accessible, we'll be
able to offer them a
way to participate.
>> In the food business,
first and foremost,
it's just gotta be
a satisfying meal.
No matter how healthy
you think you are,
if you're not enjoying it,
you're not likely to return.
So we have to balance
creating a great environment
and a welcoming
environment for folks
with various nutritional
orientations.
But in the end, anybody who
has an interest in healthy food
should be intrigued
enough to dig deeper.
And we hope we can do that
without annoying people.
>> Our fears, all our far
away unknowns, box us in.
I ask you to step
out of your box.
Climb over those walls.
And look out of your window.
And turn to the
space of the unknown.
Volunteer at the-- sorry.
Going to start again.
Our fears-- I have been
not sleeping enough,
so that's having a little
impact on my bowels.
But I'm still holding
on to my diet.
I haven't really gone and
gotten a chocolate bar.
So I think what's good
is I'm shifting away
from emotional eating.
And now I just
need to like still
manage that stress though.
It's like in the
middle of trying
to find the time
to be like, this
is going to help
me think better.
And let me get this centered.
>> Be aware of TEDx, which
is coming up this weekend
in Revolution Hall.
We have the artist in residence
of that program right now --
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Yeah, the whole show
is going to be amazing.
>> How are you doing?
>> I'm doing fine.
You know, my talk.
Have you heard about
the talk with me?
So my time was 15 with
the animation on the 17th,
and now they're like, oh,
we're three minutes off
in our whole thing.
I'm like, then you
can be shorter.
I'm like, you can be 50 seconds.
[CHATTERING]
Yeah, we might have to
make it a little higher.
I don't know.
What's going on with this?
Be careful!
Why is it so different?
Slightly a little back.
Slightly back.
Yep, right there.
Right there.
Perfect.
So once they're
in that position,
can we move them further or not?
[CHATTERING]
Hi, Maria.
Listen, you're picking
up the children, OK?
Just bring them
over here, I'm going
to send you the address to get.
It's 14th and Sharp.
OK, hold on.
Where's my-- so
why am I confused?
I don't know, man.
Maybe I should take one away.
He's pulled it back so.
>> Here we go.
>> I'm just going to chill out.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We have to change
the food culture.
People have to realize that it's
just not their own discipline
for eating better food,
which is important,
but we need to find ways in
which eating healthy foods is
really the cultural norm.
And we have a long
ways to go to do that.
I'm really glad that you
asked about food culture
because I think that that's
the important piece that's
been missed.
We talk about individual
responsibility.
And we talk about why people
are doing what they're doing.
But we fail to really
give credit to the fact
that we live within a
culture that is telling us
how we should think and
feel and act in regards
to health and wellness.
Our society doesn't
really support our choices
to be healthy and well.
Corporate work
environment-- every place
I've ever heard about, the
break room was full of junk.
I mean, can we bring
in a fruit platter?
Are you kidding?
No, bring donuts in.
What are we having for
dinner at the potluck?
Pizza, obviously.
Like can we get salad?
Sure.
What do you end up with?
White lettuce and croutons
and cheese, Caesar salad.
Like yeah, great.
White lettuce or
plain iceberg lettuce.
It's like an effort to
actually do anything healthy
in the corporate
world and in the work
world, which is where most of
us spend so much of our day.
If there's not a lot
of support there,
that's going to be
tough to make change.
>> Diet-wise, there's
still a challenge.
I still have unfortunately like,
incredible levels of stress
in my life.
My brother has been staying
with us for the past two months.
And that's a really big
source of tension for me.
And then we were trying
to buy a second house.
And we pulled out of that.
And so it's just been a very,
very busy and challenging time
on top of things with
work and other things
and Tyler's school.
I've been able to,
like I told you
before, I've been able to go
for like a week, like two weeks.
But then like when I fall off,
like I fall off really hard.
It's difficult,
especially with the boys.
And we seem to eat out quite
a bit because of our schedules
and things like that.
I would say that that
has been the biggest
barrier to being able to
successfully implement
these things is eating out.
So I'm still working on
the day-to-day choices,
like I'm trying to have at
least one paleo meal a day,
two paleo snacks a day.
And that I've been
successful with.
And I just--
I tend to feel a whole
lot better when I'm
adhering to that type of diet.
It feels like every time
we meet, I say this,
but it seems like things are
going to start slowing down,
I'm hoping.
Kind of letting my
brother stay with us
and trying to get into this--
buy this second house
and things like that
were kind of just kind
of shooting myself
in the foot for being
successful with this.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It really is these chronic,
lifestyle-based diseases that
are really taking the
greatest toll on our health.
And the United
States is actually
one of the greatest sufferers
of these chronic diseases.
So despite the fact
that we have access
to incredible modern
medicine, we're
ranking pretty poorly compared
to our fellow countries
in terms of how we're
managing the load,
the burden of chronic disease.
So it's pretty serious, I'd say.
>> What we have come to accept
as normal is the steady decline
from the age of 18 with
worsening blood pressure,
worsening clogging
of the artery,
worsening mental capacities when
in fact what is normal is fully
robust health,
physical capacities,
mental capacities into our 90s.
>> Your diet actually has
to be a lifestyle choice.
And so what we need
to look at when we're
giving individual
recommendations to patients
is we need to look at
their stage of life,
and their disease process,
and their health goals.
We need to look at if they have
a food sensitivity or a food
allergy.
But in addition, we
also need to think
about their cultural upbringing,
their ethical choices
around food.
And then also and very
importantly, their access--
do they actually have access
to this healthy, healing food?
And so all of those things need
to be taken into account when
you're working with
a patient and trying
to get them on the right path.
>> We are all individuals.
And what is optimal
for each of us
is going to be a
little bit different
and is probably going to be
a moving target because how
our bodies respond to food is
dependent on how much sleep we
got.
It's dependent on our stress.
It's dependent on exactly what
our gut microbiome is doing.
It's dependent on
the last time we were
exposed to a virus or bacteria.
There are so many
things that influence
how we respond to foods.
So creating a diet and
it's-- here's your rules,
here's your yes and your
nos, isn't really the goal.
It's creating the
scientific foundation
for understanding
how to choose a food
and then providing a framework
from which people can start,
and then experiment
to figure out
what is really optimal
for them, and what
makes them feel the best.
[CITY NOISES]
>> I have gotten
off track for sure.
And so I've just been
dealing with that, I guess.
I've been not-- I can definitely
tell a difference in how
my body feels when I was
on track versus to now
that I'm off track.
Just things were
better, little things
that I think affect the
condition like sleep.
I was sleeping a lot better,
and energy, and not even
the specifics of the actual
disease or the condition.
It was just those little
things that I noticed a lot.
And the big one is pain.
It's back.
So unfortunately, I haven't been
back to my functional medicine
doctor because
for a while there,
I was paying out of pocket.
My insurance doesn't
cover functional medicine.
And so I was paying
out of pocket.
And at some point, it just
got to be too expensive
because I was paying
hundreds of dollars
in vitamins and supplements.
And every time I went,
it was more tests.
And insurance wouldn't cover
this test or that test.
And so it was definitely
starting to add up.
Right now what's
holding me up is
I'm getting lots of information
from just which diet
to follow because now I'm
hearing that meat is not
good for arthritic conditions.
And I went to an
iridologist in town.
And she was amazing.
And she's a recovering--
guess she's not recovering.
She's in remission from
her rheumatoid arthritis.
And she is very adamant about
following a strict vegan diet.
I definitely felt
like I was confused.
I'm still confused.
That's another one of the big
reasons why I'm struggling
right now is I'm confused.
And especially when you yourself
are Googling, that's the worst.
Ooh, those are vegan ones.
Yum.
>> You can still find good
information on the internet,
but it takes a skilled eye to
be able to sift through all
the information and
pull out the pieces.
So I do think you can get some
information from the media.
But if it's specifically
related to your disease state,
and you're thinking about
making a big change,
I think you do need to seek out
a health care professional that
has that training and that can
work with you along the way.
I think you often do
need support and guidance
and practical information
to be successful.
>> Right.
And what do you
understand what's
keeping you from getting to the
between the I'll try and I can?
>> I've made a huge amount
of changes in this year.
So I mean, I do feel like I
feel like I'm doing my best,
and that's still
not good enough.
And that's what is
so upsetting me.
And it's like--
>> You know what?
>> I've done all this stuff.
>> I don't know what's--
>> And it's like it's
still the same thing.
>> There's something
right now that--
>> And I think it's
just also kind of--
I think the thing
is, like you said,
like you have to
accept that you're not
going to be able to go
back to that lifestyle.
So you have to accept that like,
OK, you've done all this stuff.
And this is part of
what you're doing.
But it's not going to get
you back to eating ice cream.
And not that you want to eat
ice cream in the first place.
So--
>> Well, that's
where you have to go.
And you know what, everybody
goes through a mourning
process.
Everyone does.
And you have to go through it.
You have to let
yourself go through it,
and you have to be angry
about what you're giving up
because you are giving up.
>> Yeah.
>> And then once you get past
that, you'll be the next point,
where you'll realize what
amazing things you gained from
this.
I mean, you will.
I know you will.
Even with a restricted
diet, your lifestyle
is actually going to be
opened up because you're
going to be healthier.
You will be able to eat an
immense amount of variety
once you get your
inflammation down.
>> Basically I was
just lying there.
I was putting my
18-month-old down.
And it's like, it
wasn't vertigo,
but it was just
like I heard a pop,
and then just everything
shifted 90 degrees.
It was really strange.
Like not my viewing angle
or anything like that,
but it just felt like--
>> Kind of your center of
balance was totally shifted.
But I mean, I think it was
more of a situation where they
really wanted to just rule
everything out because the way
that the symptoms were a little
bit all over the place, an
could have aligned with
something that was worse,
which also kind of fueled the
anxiety and the not knowing.
And I think going
through that process
and then eliminating
things, in the end,
helped because then
it gets you realizing
it wasn't these things
where it could've been.
>> So I was pretty much in the
emergency room all day that
Saturday.
And I had a CAT scan.
I had where they inject
you with the iodine
and things like that.
Not a pleasant feeling.
You know, you don't want to
get, obviously a bad prognosis.
But I was hoping that
he would tell me,
you gotta start
doing this or you
gotta start doing that
because it's, you know.
But it's definitely a
motivator, absolutely.
It's been kind of night and day
as far as heart palpitations
and really good as
far as the reflux.
But when I do go off and
I'm not eating paleo,
then the reflux kind
of comes roaring back.
And I think the night that
I had the heart palpitation,
I was having some
reflux symptoms as well.
So it's kind of maybe
related to that.
I think I was a
little naive on how
big of an adjustment
or a change it
would be, especially with things
like my work schedule and stuff
like that.
So yeah, I've got to
learn some strategies
for when things don't
go according to plan,
how to keep it all together.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We need to both change
the education when it comes
to food, and change
the food supply,
and change how
our food is grown,
and change our access to food,
and change the cost of food
so that healthful foods are
the ones that are subsidized,
not the other way around.
And so it's a problem with so
many different moving parts,
and it requires
us as a community
to really demand that all of
these different moving parts
are addressed.
>> The truth is that we now
have people in Oregon and across
the country are suffering
what we call high calorie
malnutrition.
And I feel sorry for people
who are in this condition.
I don't blame them because
our food culture has driven us
to the place where the only
access of affordable food,
for many people, are
high calorie foods that
don't have nutrients.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The prevailing wisdom is
that we have an obesity epidemic
and a lot of people who are
having trouble managing chronic
conditions, and that that is
largely due to high calorie
malnutrition, where someone
is getting a whole lot of fat
and sugar, but not the nutrients
they need really to stay
healthy.
And so in that case,
prescribing vegetables
might be appropriate.
In other cases, when
someone's having stalled
healing due to malnutrition,
especially if they're
low income, the problem might
be protein in their diet,
that they're just not
getting enough protein
to grow new skin, and
therefore they can't heal.
So that's where we
started our first program,
was in what we now call
curative nutrition dosing.
So we're finding folks who have
stalled healing with wounds
or burns or surgical
incisions who
aren't able to get better
because their body just doesn't
have the nutrients to do it.
And so we prescribe
them a limited course
of nutritious food that is
tailored to them specifically,
the right amount of grams
of protein and calories
for each meal.
And they eat it and get better.
>> The social determinants of
health make up about 70% to 75%
of what is a person's
personal health picture.
That's something that
ordinarily, a physician
can't impact very
much for his patients.
But they can impact the
nutritional picture in the home
by addressing food
security in the clinic.
Providence has adopted
a particularly deep set
of interventions, and so they
screen for food insecurity
because it's quick and simple.
But then, if a person
is food insecure,
they're matched up with
a Health Navigator who
assesses their full situation
that has patients walking out
of a clinic with
some new resources
to help improve their diet.
When I started in
April of 2014, there
was one clinic
screening in Oregon,
and now there are over 200.
>> A lot of my patients who
have done it so far have really
found that things have improved.
So let me know how it goes.
But I think that it's
been really helpful.
And thanks again
for being honest.
>> So from the top down, our
medical decision makers really
have kind of a blind spot here.
So it's really important
for programs like this
to fill that blind spot and
to inform our system of what
could be and what should be.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It's pretty exciting.
We got this idea when we
learned about My Street Grocery,
we got this idea
to write a grant
through our Good Samaritan
Foundation, which
is the foundation
here at our hospital.
So we decided we
wanted to write a grant
to get vouchers to help people
shop for healthier food options
because what we
were finding was,
as our physicians would
go into the exam room
and talk to someone
with congestive heart
failure or diabetes, and
the physicians would say,
you need to be eating
healthier, eat more vegetables.
And the patients would look
at him like, you're crazy.
You know, I get $180 a
month in food stamps,
and I can't afford
that kind of diet.
>> Upon coming here, I had a
very unique experience with
a patient and was counseling
them on dietary choices
for their diabetes.
And she looked at and
said, are you crazy?
That's a rich man's diet.
I can't eat those
things and pay for them.
And she went to the canned food
store and things like that.
So that kind of
started me on my quest
to do a project like this.
>> Basically, it's not
only bringing the food
to a population that really
needs to have better access,
but it's a more well-rounded
approach to access because it
means relationships that are
already built in and that trust
between patient and
provider and social worker.
And it's also financial access.
It's dietary information
specific to medical conditions.
So I like to say that bringing
the food into the community
is not the end of our work.
It's the beginning of our work.
So we bring the food, and
now with this partnership,
we provide more resources
that truly make it accessible.
>> All the patients
have to do is show up.
They don't have to have
an appointment on Tuesday.
So usually they're
told by their physician
or they're referred off
to a Good Sam campus.
They don't have to
jump through any hoops.
We made it as
simple as possible.
And they come and meet
either Scott or I,
the social worker or I,
and they get $15 a week,
three $5.00 vouchers weekly.
>> And by bringing My Street
in, we bring in what we know is
a healthier food selection.
If we just gave them $15 a
week to go shop at Safeway,
they might go buy
processed, prepackaged foods
and the inexpensive
stuff that they're
used to buying because
that's what they can afford.
So here we know they're
getting fresher,
organic, healthier food
items in their shopping.
>> So these food programs are
important because they are
treating the immediate
needs of patients.
They're improving lives first.
That's why they're important.
And secondly, they're
important because they're
making a case for food
to be used as medicine.
And I mean, they're helping
insurers and regulators
understand the
role that food can
play in how we can
save money and reduce
suffering with a
small resource that's
already available
by just applying it
in an innovative way.
>> Adelante Mujeres has
been around since 2002.
And we started out first
with our education programs.
And one thing that we were
seeing over the last 10,
now 12, 13 years, is that the
mujeres, the women that we
see in the program,
their health has
changed a lot over that
generation of students.
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> Because most of our
patients come from Mexico,
their basic diet
is really healthy.
They eat beans and rice and
tortillas and delicious mole,
and they do a lot
of physical work.
They walk places.
They exercise on
a regular basis.
And then they come
to this country,
and there's a wealth of options.
But the majority of those
options are really not healthy.
>> And so a couple of years ago,
Adelante Mujeres really wanted
to make a concerted effort
to not only address food,
but exercise, stress relief,
all sorts of holistic parts
of health.
>> One of those initiatives
that we're doing is this great
collaboration between Adelante
Mujeres and Virginia Garcia.
This prescription program
involves the provider
being able to say, hey, you've
got a family member who's
at risk, either because
they have diabetes
or they have hypertension
or they have obesity.
Would your family be interested
in getting some education
around healthy eating, learning
how to prepare healthy food,
and then getting a voucher
to go to the farmer's market?
And so I have several
of my families
that have participated now
have for a second year,
and they're really
making great strides
in making healthier
choices and having access
to that fresh local produce.
>> We are working
with Virginia Garcia.
So the doctor recommends
the patient with us.
So we are in this in this group
where we have the classes.
And this class is every
month, one time every month.
And they receive $6.00 per
person in the house per week.
And they can spend that money
at the Forest Grove Farmer's
Market.
>> Another part of the structure
of our program has been to have
consistent relationships, so
the folks that they're seeing
in these monthly meetings
are the same staff that are
at the farmer's market that can
help them navigate once they
get there.
OK, we did that thing in class.
How are we going to
find it in the market?
Or I'm searching for this
type of chili or something.
Or do you know a farmer
that has this or that?
And so feeling confident
that they're going to,
when they arrive at
the farmer's market,
have someone to also be there
to kind of be a support when
they're trying to find
whatever, or feel more welcome
when they come to the market.
>> They're enjoying
eating more vegetables.
And then we can also
follow their metrics.
You know, when they come into
the clinic, we weigh them,
we check their blood pressure,
we check their blood sugar.
And we're able to see small
but steady improvements
in their health.
And again, we're getting
the whole family involved
because even if it's a mom who
has diabetes or is overweight,
we know that their kids
are at risk as well.
And so the more
vegetables and fruit
that's brought
into the household,
the healthier they're going
to get used to eating.
So that works really well.
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> I think with a community,
there's really nothing worse
than feeling really isolated and
alone and like you're the only
person doing something.
And when you have
a community, you're
really motivated
to stay on track.
So when I was really sick, I
had a very small community,
maybe three or four people that
I was talking to almost every
day.
And when they had successes,
even if I wasn't experiencing
success, I was so motivated to
keep doing what I was doing.
So starting the
blog was basically
my outlet to start
talking about what
I was going through with
people that also had
personal experience
with it because as much
as my husband loves me, and he's
interested in what I was doing,
he didn't want to hear
about it day in and day out.
He didn't really
understand what it
felt like to be going through
what I was going through.
So that was a really
big outlet for me
as far as just sharing
what I was going through,
and then being able to
connect with other people who
were in a similar boat, and
also just kind of figure out
what they were doing and
if it was working for them,
and try and refine what I was
doing and what I was learning.
In addition to that, I do try to
do a lot of community building
because I really believe
that the people that
are able to be successful find
community, and have friends
that can keep them
accountable, and can
have social gatherings with
and kind of commiserate
and collaborate with.
So I try to share a
lot of that on my blog,
too, to help people
connect with each other.
>> Environment is
super important,
and that translates to
the house, the home,
wherever that might be, whatever
that looks like for someone.
If the people in your household,
your immediate nuclear family,
whatever that might look like,
if there's not a lot of support
there, that's going to
be tough to make change.
So that's tough.
And then the
environment that you
are in socially outside of work,
what are those people doing?
Where are they going?
How do they support you?
Oy, that's really hard.
So if we had a
culture of support
for everyone to do the
best that they could
rather than this judgment that
continues to happen almost all
the time, it'd be a lot easier.
So what people have
said about the groups
that I run, the food
story groups that I run,
is that these groups
are the only place
in their entire
lives where they can
have the conversation
about food and food story
and body image and
fitness and wellness,
where they know that people
understand what they're saying
without them having to
explain it in great detail
because they get it.
They're living the
same sort of stuff.
>> But it's really
helped you, the diet?
>> Yeah, it has, when I'm on it,
when I'm doing it religiously.
It's been a struggle, for sure.
>> Yeah.
>> So Adam hopefully will make
it, but he may not make it.
His life has just gotten crazy
busy this morning with work
and he had to take off
to work, unfortunately.
You need community, you
need your tribe who really
get what you're going through.
That's so necessary
for people to succeed
because so often, they
feel like, again, I'm
the only one who can't
get my act together.
I'm the one who doesn't have
the smarts or the information
or the wherewithal
or the motivation
or the willpower
to make this work.
Then you go sit in a
group of six people,
and they all go, oh,
yeah, I totally get that.
I'm the same way.
And you go, oh, wait.
Oh, I'm totally normal.
There are people who get
what I'm going through.
You're going through
what I'm going through?
OK.
Whew.
>> I think the best thing,
and this is the hardest thing,
is the empathy for yourself
when you do fall off the wagon
and you do screw up,
the empathy for that.
Nobody's really there to be,
like, hey, you know what?
Because they don't even get it.
They don't even realize
it's really hard to be
in your shoes and my shoes.
>> Having a supportive community
actually directly improves
our health.
So having a supportive community
actually changes our hormones.
So it changes things
like cortisol.
It changes how our bodies
are responding to stress.
It changes things like oxytocin.
It's called the love hormone.
So when we are feeling
connected and supported.
we are producing
more oxytocin, which
is anti-inflammatory and helps
regulate the immune system.
It helps set up the
situation in our bodies
where our bodies can heal.
So having a sense of
community and support
has been well-established
in the scientific literature
to improve health outcomes.
And so when we have
that, we don't just
have the practical part of this
person who understands what I'm
going through, this person
who is a cheerleader,
or a shoulder I can cry on.
But then we get this
wonderful hormonal response
to having that community
that by itself helps speed up
our healing and
promotes better health.
So it's absolutely fundamental.
>> That's awesome.
I was super secluded
in the beginning,
and it made me really bummed.
So I just put myself out there.
And it's so funny
because I had met you
before at Mickey Trescott's
book talk at Natural Grocers.
We sat beside each other,
because I recognized you.
>> I had really fast
success with it.
By November 2013 was
my last MS flare.
And I made it a year and a
half with no flares at all
until I accidentally ate one
bite of gluten at a restaurant,
and I lost feeling in
my leg for three months.
And it is just now coming back.
>> It's definitely comforting
to feel that you're not alone
in this.
Beth has definitely inspired me.
I love her story, and it's real.
It's real evidence.
I mean, I haven't had
an actual huge flare-up,
so I haven't been able
to experience that.
But she has.
And it's a real.
Thing this whole thing with
diet and body, it's real.
And so I love that
I found someone
so close to me that
has put themselves
into remission through diet.
That's so inspiring
because it's a long road
and it's so frustrating.
And you are definitely--
I've been tempted to give up.
But you know, when you have
a friend and a success story,
it definitely keeps you going.
>> You know, I really
had to think about it,
of how much joy do I get from
being in a restaurant to how
much joy do I get chasing
my kids at a park?
>> Right.
>> I get way more joy chasing my
kids at a park than I do eating
in a restaurant.
>> Yeah.
So I was on prednisone for three
and 1/2 years, 10 milligrams
a day for the first two
years, and then the last year
was five milligrams a day.
And then the last
half year, I was just
going down every month five
milligrams, four milligrams,
three milligrams, two
milligrams, one milligram.
And now I'm
completely off of it.
Yay.
So that's a good
feeling because I
was really nervous about
the long-term effects
and prednisone.
So.
I like them, too.
I think I'm used to the tartness
and the natural sweetness.
I feel like we really do--
there's so much
effort that we put.
We're like hard workers, us
people with disease and dietary
restrictions.
We're like the hardest workers.
>> You know, the net gain from
having more energy and feeling
healthier has really been a
plus for us and had a positive
effect on our lifestyle.
>> Yeah.
So I mean, it's been
about two months
now of cutting out sugar, where
before, my husband can tell you
I'd add sugar.
>> You can see it right here.
>> Yeah, still
have it over here.
>> So this is kind of
probably bare minimum.
She used to have
the big syrup pumps.
>> Yeah, every morning.
And this is more now on hand
for guests or something,
or just kind of left over.
I've seen a real difference
in my energy level.
And I think that now when
I do have some sugar,
I appreciate it a lot more.
>> She's lost almost 10 pounds,
and I've lost almost 10 pounds.
But she's lost a lot
of inches and things
like that because of sugar.
>> When we sat down and
talked about how can we make
a lifestyle change for our
family versus how can you make
a change and how
can I make a change,
then it made all the
difference because before,
he would be doing something, and
I would half do it or this sort
of thing.
But once we sat down and said,
well, what will work for us?
How can we meal plan
together so that it
makes sense for both
of us, or how can we
encourage each other?
It made all the difference.
>> You know, once she's kind
of been on board and kind
of eating the same lifestyle as
me, it's helped tremendously.
So a little bit of an update
from me on the medical side.
So I have been able to
discontinue seeing my specialty
cardiologist.
So my heart palpitations
have decreased
to the amount where it's
usually about once a week,
maybe once every
eight to nine days,
whereas I used to have
them multiple times a day.
And my blood pressure
is in control now.
It was high on the
systolic range, I believe,
and now it's under on both.
Adam, can you say
hi to the camera?
>> Apple cider vinegar?
[APPLAUSE]
>> Good morning.
I made all this.
[APPLAUSE]
Identity is like a window that
frames our view of the world.
>> We can handle something
suboptimal better if we have
all the nutrients available
to help process that.
So we can handle
a stressful event.
We can handle a late night.
We can handle exposure to a food
that normally would be really
inflammatory for our bodies.
We recover faster.
And so having an overall
nutrient density focus
in the diet becomes
the foundation
of a diet that supports health.
>> The inflammation
has gone down a ton.
And so I don't have as much
pain in all of my body.
Yeah.
So it's been making
my mobility better.
It's making my
energy levels go up,
just my mood, my
sleep, everything
has gotten so much better.
>> I would say I'm
down about 15 pounds.
And then just little things,
like my skin has cleared up
a lot, and other things.
I'm not as anxious.
>> Things are better,
and things are improving.
And we're working with a
slightly modified treatment
plan, which is more of the
same, like staying with my diet,
and staying with
my healthy yoga.
>> People are saying, we want
time with our physicians.
We want more office time.
We want education
about prevention.
about food as medicine.
>> I think that the medical
community has a lot to learn
about how important
nutrition is.
And by the way, I
keep meeting people
who are senior level doctors
in medical institutions
who are like me, who
have come to realize
how important nutrition is
and are actually using it now.
>> Just working with my
doctor, test results,
really seeing how the foods
impact my body and my blood
pressure and my A1C and
those type of things.
>> I'm glad that I worked
on the first diet and failed
because it's given me a lot more
drive and a lot more incentive.
>> It's just trying
to keep on track,
and trying to not
diverge off of that.
And the process is
not linear, I think.
>> These stories are like
windows into our past,
and I need to share this
knowledge with my children.
And I ask you to do the same.
And this will become a source
of learning for generations
to come.
>> I want to be playing soccer,
playing music with my children,
grandchildren,
great grandchildren,
in my 80's and 90's, and
preferably when I'm 100.
>> I'm getting my
health under control.
And that was the
step I wanted to take
before I could move on
to the next step, which
would be having a family.
>> You know, once you
start to see a success,
then you start to
get the motivation,
and it's easy to keep it going.
But in the beginning,
it's hard, right?
So yeah.
I think that I
have a lot of hope
for my journey going forward.
>> I can still have a fulfilling
life and actually make these
changes, and I don't have
to go back to that old--
you know, that's not the
goal of getting healthy.
>> And in the meantime, I say,
go home and cook a healthy meal
in your home with your family
because that's what you can do
today, what you can do now.
>> And this isn't like
a cute Portlandia joke.
This is real, and it matters.
>> It's really changed
my life for the better.
It's like-- almost
saved my life.
>> I'm still on my journey.
This is maybe the
end of the film,
but it's not the end
of my journey for me.
>> We can all find our path
forward by breaking out
of our boxes, by painting
and reclaiming our cities,
and recording the lost stories
in our community because when
we look out our
window of identity,
we are all under
the same blue sky.
[APPLAUSE]
>> And we need the public
to share the message that
they're learning as well so that
we can affect as many people
as possible.
And I do believe
that that compounds
on an exponential level,
on a community scale,
that if we can heal
ourselves, if we can feel good
in our bodies, then
we want to share that
with our friends, our
family, our community.
>> This is a lifestyle.
This is a lifelong commitment
to health, and it is a journey.
But we all have to come to
this place in our own way.
We all have to come
to it at our own pace.
>> The future of health care is
teaching people how to create
more and more health
in their lives.
That is the future
of health care.
And whatever
profession will best
deliver that will be the health
care profession of the future.
>> Then we don't have to wrestle
so much with what we're going
to do with all these people
who are going to get chronic
disease because chronic
disease will disappear.
And I think it's
possible for us to do
if we have the will to do it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]